Meditations
by Marcus aurelius

2.5 Concentrate every minute like a Roman - like a man - on doing what's in front of you with precise and genuine seriousness, tenderly, willingly, with justice. And on freeing yourself from all other distractions. Yes, you can-if you do everything as if it were the last thing you were doing in your life, and stop being aimless, stop letting your emotions override what your mind tells you, stop being hypocritical, self-centered, irritable. You see how few things you have to do to live a satisfying and reverent life? If you can manage this, that's all even the gods can ask of you.

2.8 Ignoring what goes on in other people's souls-no one ever came to grief that way. But if you won't keep track of what your own soul's doing, how can you not be unhappy?

2.14 Even if you're going to live three thousand more years, or ten times that, remember: you cannot lose another life than the one you're living now, or live another one than the one you're losing. The longest amounts to the same as the shortest. The present is the same for everyone; its loss is the same for everyone; and it should be clear that a brief instant is all that is lost. For you can't lose either the past or the future; how could you lose what you don't have? 
Remember that the longest-lived and those who will die soonest lose the same thing. The present is all that they can give up, since that is all you have, and what you do not have, you cannot lose.

2.17 Human life: 
Duration: momentary. 
Nature: changeable. 
Perception: dim. 
Condition of Body: decaying. 
Soul: spinning around. 
Fortune: unpredictable.
Lasting Fame: uncertain. 
Sum Up: The body and its parts are a river, the soul a dream and mist, life is warfare and a journey far from home, lasting reputation is oblivion.
Then what can guide us?
Only Philosophy 

3.4 You need to avoid certain things in your train of thought. everything random, everything irrelevant. And certainly everything self-important or malicious. You need to get used to winnowing your thoughts, so that if someone says, "What are you thinking about?" you can respond at once (and truthfully). And it would be obvious at once from your answer that your thoughts were straightforward and considerate ones the thoughts of an unselfish person, one unconcerned with pleasure and with sensual indulgence generally, with squabbling, with slander and envy, or anything else you'd be ashamed to be caught thinking.

3.12 If you do the job in a principled way, with diligence, energy and patience, if you keep yourself free of distractions, and keep the spirit inside you undamaged, as if you might have to give it back at any moment-
If you can embrace this without fear or expectation-can find fulfillment in what you're doing now, as Nature intended, and in superhuman truthfulness (every word, every utterance)-then your life will be happy.
No one can prevent that.


4.3 People try to get away from it all-to the country, to the beach, to the mountains. You always wish that you could too. Which is idiotic: you can get away from it anytime you like.
By going within.
Nowhere you can go is more peaceful-more free of interruptions-than your own soul. Especially if you have other things to rely on. An instant's recollection and there it is: complete tranquillity. And by tranquillity I mean a kind of harmony.
So keep getting away from it all-like that. Renew yourself. But keep it brief and basic

Keep this refuge in mind: the back roads of your self. Above all, no strain and no stress. Be straightforward. Look at things like a man, like a human being, like a citizen, like a mortal. And among the things you turn to, these two:
i. That things have no hold on the soul. They stand there unmoving, outside it. Disturbance comes only from within-from our own perceptions.
ii. That everything you see will soon alter and cease to exist. Think of how many changes you've already seen.
"The world is nothing but change. Our life is only perception."

5.16 Anywhere you can lead your life, you van lead a good one

5.18 Nothing happens to anyone that he can't endure

5.23 It would take an idiot to feel self-importance or distress. Or any indignation, either. As if the things that irritate us lasted.

6.16 What is it in ourselves that we should prize?
An audience clapping? No. No more than the clacking of their tongues. 
So we throw out other people's recognition. What's left for us to prize?
I think it's this: to do (and not do) what we were designed for. That's the goal of all trades, all arts, and what each of them aims at: that the thing they create should do what it was designed to do. The nurseryman who cares for the vines, the horse trainer, the dog breeder-this is what they aim at. 
So that's what we should prize. Hold on to that, and you won't be tempted to aim at anything else.
And if you can't stop prizing a lot of other things? Then you'll never be free-free, independent, imperturbable. Because you'll always be envious and jealous, afraid that people might come and take it all away from you. 

6.18 The way people behave. They refuse to admire their contemporaries, the people whose lives they share. No, but to be admired by Posterity - people they've never met and never will - that's what they set their hearts on. You might as well be upset at not being a hero to your great-grandfather.

6.19 Not to assume it's impossible because you find it hard. But to recognize that if it's humanly possible, you can do it too.